Getting started guide for the host firewall (#12537)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/gettingstarted/host-firewall.rst

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _host_firewall:

********************
Host Firewall (beta)
********************

This document serves as an introduction to Cilium's host firewall, to enforce
security policies for Kubernetes nodes.

.. include:: ../beta.rst

Enable the Host Firewall in Cilium
==================================

.. include:: k8s-install-download-release.rst

Deploy Cilium release via Helm:

.. parsed-literal ::

    helm install cilium |CHART_RELEASE|        \\
      --namespace kube-system                  \\
      --set global.kubeProxyReplacement=strict \\
      --set global.hostFirewall=true           \\
      --set global.devices=ethX,ethY

At this point, the Cilium-managed nodes are ready to enforce network policies.

Enable Policy Audit Mode for the Host Endpoint
==============================================

> When applying `HostPolicies` carelessly, it's easy to block the access to the
> nodes or to break the cluster's normal behavior (ex. by blocking communication
> with kube-api).

Reviewer: Maybe we can start with a more neutral start point than going straight to assuming careless policy apply behaviour ;-)

Here's a suggestion for alternative wording, feel free to take/modify for what you think makes sense:

```suggestion
`HostPolicies` enforce strict access control over connectivity to nodes. Particular care must be taken to ensure that when host policies are imported, Cilium does not block access to the nodes or break the cluster's normal behavior (for example by blocking communication with ``kube-apiserver``).
```

Author: Hehe, yep. I took your recommendation but dropped `strict` and extended `to nodes` to `to and from nodes`.

> To avoid such issues, we can switch the host firewall in audit mode, to
> validate the impact of host policies before enforcing them.

Reviewer: Probably worth making it clear that policy audit mode disables policy enforcement, with similar wording to the policy GSG.

```suggestion
To avoid such issues, we can switch the host firewall in audit mode, to
validate the impact of host policies before enforcing them. When Policy Audit Mode is enabled, no network policy is enforced so this setting is *not recommended for production deployment*.
```

(I appreciate that we're probably moving folks from no security -> hostfw so it's not such a big deal. I also note that the instructions here use the `endpoint config` approach to individually enable policy audit for the host which mitigates the risk to policy enforcement for pods. So if you want to be less loud with the warning I could understand, above is suggestion taken from the other doc).

Author: I think that's light enough, I'll add it.

And yes, I took some time to write this because I wanted to be able to switch into policy audit mode only for the host firewall. Otherwise, we can't expect users to take this approach in more realistic environments. The downside is that it exposes `cilium endpoint config` a bit more than we've used to in the past.

::

>     $ HOST_EP_ID=$(cilium endpoint list -o json | jq '.[] | select( .status.identity.id == 1 ).id')

Reviewer: FWIW `jq` is not available in the Cilium container so this is not necessarily going to 'just work' for the average user.

Author: Ok, I think that's a big enough problem that we should find a way to address it. I want users to be able to copy paste those commands as much as possible.

One idea is to restrict the whole guide to a single node. I would ask users to set a label on a node and I'd apply the policy only for that label. Then, we can `jq` the Cilium pod for that node and use it in subsequent commands. So something like:
```bash
export NODE_NAME=k8s1
kubectl label node $NODE_NAME access=ssh
[...]
CILIUM_POD_NAME=$(kubectl -n $CILIUM_NAMESPACE get pods -o json | jq -r '.items[] | select( .metadata.labels."k8s-app" == "cilium" and .spec.nodeName == env.NODE_NAME ).metadata.name')
HOST_EP_ID=$(kubectl -n $CILIUM_NAMESPACE exec $CILIUM_POD_NAME -- cilium endpoint list -o json | jq '.[] | select( .status.identity.id == 1 ).id')
[...]
```
One downside is that it could be a bit harder for users to understand what's happening, as in what info. is `jq` grabbing. So I at least need to be cautious with variable names I use :-)

What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Can't you simply replace `-o json | jq` by `-o jsonpath` with the relevant filter to get the endpoint id?

Author: Aaah, that's what `-o jsonpath` is!

Adjust the Host Policy to Your Environment
==========================================

As long as the host endpoint is running in audit mode, communications
disallowed by the policy won't be dropped. They will however be reported by
``cilium monitor`` as ``action audit``. The audit mode thus allows you to
adjust the host policy to your environment, to avoid unexpected connection
breakages.

.. parsed-literal ::

    $ cilium monitor -t policy-verdict --related-to $HOST_EP_ID
    Policy verdict log: flow 0x0 local EP ID 1687, remote ID 6, proto 1, ingress, action allow, match L3-Only, 192.168.33.12 -> 192.168.33.11 EchoRequest
    Policy verdict log: flow 0x0 local EP ID 1687, remote ID 6, proto 6, ingress, action allow, match L3-Only, 192.168.33.12:37278 -> 192.168.33.11:2379 tcp SYN
    Policy verdict log: flow 0x0 local EP ID 1687, remote ID 2, proto 6, ingress, action audit, match none, 10.0.2.2:47500 -> 10.0.2.15:6443 tcp SYN

.. warning::

    Make sure that none of the communications required to access the cluster or
    for the cluster to work properly are denied. They should appear as ``action
    allow``.

> 

Reviewer: We lack the actual instructions for the user on how to turn this monitor output into a rule here.

A couple of suggestions, either:
* Refer the user to https://docs.cilium.io/en/v1.8/gettingstarted/policy-creation/#observe-policy-verdicts
* Refactor the above doc into a generic enough piece that it could be reused for the host endpoint.
* Introduce some hostfw-specific instructions here.

Author: I'll refer users to `Creating policies from verdicts` (btw, we're not consistent in our title capitalization across the docs).

There's one bit that's probably more common with the host firewall, without being specific to the host firewall: its policies tend to rely more on entities, mostly because there's a lot more sources and destinations to allow. Maybe it would make sense to extend `Creating policies from verdicts` with one example of an entity-based rule?

Reviewer: I guess I'd prefer to put such logic here to keep the creating policies GSG as simple as possible, but if there's a minimal recommendation to make either in that creating policies GSG or in this doc here then sure. It probably makes sense to at least mention that entities policies can be useful for enforcement(+link). This isn't a panacea, we won't cover all possible options, ultimately we still leave it up to the user to understand the policy model / what's available and craft their policies using the constructs we have available.
